okay good to see you all thank you god
it's Thursday again fun one day to go
okay I'll try to make a quick okay
or I will try to make it feel like it's
quick not to worry too much
all right we're to get into more and
more interesting stuff you can probably
tell last time at the end of the lecture
I talked about general curves in space
and I took a prototype the simplest
curves there is lines right and lines we
found convenient to represent in
parametric form which means that we
write each coordinate as a function of
an ability variable which we usually
call t but not o not necessarily T it
could be any other letter of your choice
by default we could t and then each of
the three variables is written as a
function of this T I'm hearing more
people today than I am useful you've
spoiled me in the previous lectures
you've been so quiet so let's keep it
this way so these are arbitrary
functions in T a priori and in the book
you can look at various examples there
are some pretty pretty cool pretty cool
curve that you can parameterize this way
for example a spiral which goes like
this and many other ones I'm not going
to go to go over this examples because
they are fairly easy to to just read
about in the book what I want to
emphasize is the fact that this is a
natural generalization of the formulas
we had for lines for which these
functions had very special form
they were linear functions functions of
degree 1 in the variable t I can wait I
mean just knock them yeah thanks so so
that's that's what that's what we have
now I want to I want to look at it in a
slightly different way and I want to
think of this as not just a way to break
through the curve but all but as a but
as a function with values and vectors
because the point is that when you have
three coordinates when you have X Y Z in
general you can you can view them as
coordinates over a point in space X Y Z
but you can also draw a vector from the
origin to this point that's called the
position vector of this point so there
is always this two ways of thinking
about the triple of numbers X Y Z this
is the point and this which we also
write as X I plus YJ plus ZK is the
position vector and even though we
realize that these are two different
objects we use the same essentially the
same information to represent this
object and so oftentimes it's convenient
to interpret a tipple of numbers in two
different ways at the point or is a
vector so if we interpret it as a point
we just think of this point as
traversing this this curve in three
space at each Moorman key which actually
can think of as time if you wish it will
be in a certain position and as time
goes by it will trace this curve but you
can also
view this three functions as components
of a vector so we get a vector valued
functions function which we can denote
as R of T so that's the vector in which
the first component will be F of T the
second component will be G of T and the
third component of the HS in other words
if if this point lies on this curve you
can think of of this point P moving
along the curve and so that it's three
coordinates are changing as a function
as functions of T FG and H but you can
also think of the vector itself moving
so that the endpoint goes along this
curve and that's what this function R of
T represents we are not used to thinking
of vectors as static objects we would
usually talk about a vector so there's a
particular vector but nothing prevents
us from allowing the vector to change
with time say or with some variable T
and then what we get is not a single
vector but we get a vector for each
value of T each value of T gives rise to
a particular vector which we denote
which we simply denoted R so the
convenience of this is that we could if
we think of it in this way we cannot we
can use very saturations on vectors and
apply them to this vector valued
functions for example we can add two
vector valued functions if you have R 1
of T and R 2 of T we can take the sum so
that would just mean taking the sum of
the components so for example you have F
1 of T plus F 2 of T and the same for G
and H I just want to save time I'm not
going to write it in detail you get the
idea
if you were thinking in terms of points
you wouldn't be able to do that it
wouldn't make sense because we cannot
add up points points cannot be we cannot
add one point to another but we can add
vectors we can use per a parallelogram
rule or triangle rule whatever you like
there is a rule for adding vectors
vectors can be added up so that's why
when we convert this into vector valued
function we can use the saturation and
sometimes it's very convenient what is
perhaps perhaps even more important is
that we can approach this as as
functions and apply other operations
which we normally apply to functions
which are value to numbers like
differentiation and integration this
kind of functions can be differentiated
and integrated just like normal
functions and what it means it's simply
applying this activation to each of the
T component so it's very straightforward
you don't really have to think about it
too much you just differentiate the
first one differentiate the second one
and in to train to the third one and
this is something which actually has
important applications because the
derivative of this function will give
you information about tangent lines and
tangent vectors to your to your curve so
derivative that would be our prime of T
this is we use the same notation as for
normal functions but I shouldn't forget
this side which which emphasizes that it
is a vector so that would be just taking
the first derivative of F for the root
of three and four thirds of H and so the
derivative has a meaning namely if we
take I want to emphasize that I want to
evaluate at a particular point which
I'll call T zero so there is always this
issue with notation when I write
something like
our of T there is a question what do I
mean by this do I mean a particular
value for a particular T or do I mean
all of these values for all values of T
as functions as a function of T and
usually with easily it's clear from the
context but now I want to really
emphasize that I take a specific value
that's why I call it t zero so this will
not be dude I don't want to view this
now at the function I want to view this
as the value of that function the
derivative I have this particular value
T zero for example T zero could be equal
to zero like in the example which we
calculated at the very end of last
lecture so that would mean that we are
evaluating the derivative at the point t
zero so if we do that this is a specific
vector this is a specific vector
corresponding to point corresponding to
the value of T which I call T zero which
is specific value particular number some
numeric value and and the upshot of all
this is that this is this is a tangent
vector fine tangent vector to the curve
to the curve described by by this
equations at the point at the specific
point which I'll call say x0 y0 and z0
which is f of t 0 g of t 0 and last time
last time at the very end of last
lecture we looked at a example of this
how this works at the very end of last
lecture so once you pick a value T 0 you
have a particular point on your curve
let me go back to the picture
[Applause]
so let's say this is the point P so that
would be the point x0 y0 and z0 that's
the point which corresponds to the value
of t equal to 0 and then for other
values it's somewhere along this red
curve so if you want to calculate the
tangent vector to this curve at this
point that's going to look something
like this so this this is going this is
precisely this R prime of TD y Y the
derivative Y the derivative give you a
tangent vector well that that's clear
because that should be clear from what
we discussed before because what is the
derivative the derivative by definition
is obtained as follows we take the value
so the roots for t 0 is the value at T 0
plus some small number let's call H
minus R it's not at t 0 divided by H so
let's say this is the point when G is
equal to G 0 and let's say this is the
point on the curve that's the same red
curve so maybe I should use the same the
same color that's the point t equal to 0
our original point which I call P on
that picture and this is this is the
point P prime which corresponds to
somewhere UT 0 plus h but remember we
also have the origin somewhere so we
have coordinate system I might be fine
this is I blow up a small part of this
kitchen but so there is a coordinate
system somewhere in background and there
is the origin a point all right so ah
our R of T 0 plus h is going to be this
vector
an hour of t0 is going to be this vector
the vector eyes I have already drawn on
this picture this one so and I'm using
the standard formula for derivative the
derivative is is the ink is the
increment divided by the change in the
parameter the increment in the values
when you change the parameter by H
divided by the parameter so it's like
velocity you calculate velocity by
taking the difference between positions
and dividing by the time right so it's
the same idea the same formula for ISO
normal functions we apply exactly the
same formula for vector functions so
what do we get as a result we have to
subtract this vector from this vector
and we know how to do this by triangle
rule it's just the vector connecting the
two C so the point is that the
difference between these two vectors is
just the vector connecting them you see
because why is it the difference because
if you take this Plus this you get this
so that means that if you take this
minus this you get this so the green
vector is the difference is the
numerator there and I divided by H when
I divide by H I just shrink it I just
well it depends if I shrink if H is very
small and actually my x some large
number so this is done to rescale it
because if I don't do this this
difference is actually going to
disappear because as the point goes
closer and closer and closer this is
going to become smaller and smaller and
smaller and actually what I want to do
is I want to take the limit of this when
I wrote when I wrote what I wrote was an
approximation and today to make it more
precise I have to say it's a limit when
H goes to 0 of this ratio so if I didn't
divide by H I would get anything
meaningful I would definitely get zero
zero vector because this green thing
will shrink to zero if H goes to zero
because this point is going to be the
same so these two vectors going to same
are minus r0 so what I do is that
rescale by H so I adjust
for the fact that actually I'm getting
closer and closer and when I do that it
doesn't go doesn't necessarily go 2-0
anymore right so in fact it is going to
stay finite and as the point gets closer
and closer and closer I'm actually going
to get something which will be tangent
which is a which is what I drew here in
this picture so that's the reason that's
the reason why is the tangent vector
it's a tangent vector in the following
sense
there are many tangent vectors because
if I have one I can always multiply by
something by any number I can multiply
by five by ten by million it's still
going to be a tangent vector because
when I multiply a vector by something I
don't change its direction I only change
the magnitude so if the direction is the
same if it were if it was the tangent
vector to begin with it will remain
tangent vector when I multiply by
something so so this is slightly
inconvenient because you are you can you
might get one vector using particular
permutation of the curve and someone
else may use a different permutation and
then get a different vector they're not
going to be that different because both
will be tangent so they will both have
the same direction but one of them could
be like there's another one in longer or
shorter so it's a it oftentimes is a
good idea to agree on normalization and
so no matter which result we get we
might say okay let's let's find the
vector which is a which has a unique
unit length so so then what we need to
do and that's that that's a vector which
is called t20 is is obtained by dividing
this tangent vector the royal tangent
vector that we get by taking the
derivative and dividing by its length by
its magnitude because when you divide
the vector by its magnitude you're going
to get something of magnitude 0
magnitude so a magnitude 1
I I was jumping ahead of myself because
what I was going to say next is that
this only makes sense if this is
one-zero but of course but assuming that
only assuming that 0 is not 0 it's
possible that this vector is 0 to begin
with so then we can't normalize it it is
zero but if it is nonzero we can divide
by its magnitude and get a unit vector
so this is called a unit tangent vector
it's still not exactly unique because
these are two of them now they could be
this one or could be this one but the
big U which is much less now the two
possibilities so it could be very useful
sometimes and at the end of last lecture
I use this derivative the tangent vector
to write down parametric equation for
the tangent line to this point equations
parametric equations I made a coup
equations for the tangent line to this
point to the curve at this point
and these are very easy to write because
we know what the initial point is it's
just x0 y0 and z0 and all we need is the
components of the tangent of a tangent
vector we have found a tangent vector by
taking the derivatives that's a top line
on this board so that's going to be f
prime of t0 and now I have to choose and
now I have to choose an objective
parameter folder for the line I mean
it's better to choose a different
parameter than for the curve because we
don't want to indicate that they kind of
go hand in hand they don't the tangent
line we are talking about is this
tangent line on which this tangent
vector lies it only it only has
something to do with this curve at this
particular point a priori has nothing to
do with this curve at this point of this
point at that point right so there's no
there's no reason to call the parameter
for this line also key because key word
key was used as the parameter for the
original curve it's better to separate
the two fix if you have so many
different letters that we could use so
why not use a different letter and the
first thing that comes to mind is later
s just the next one in alphabet so
that's why we use F but you can use
whatever you want so as long as it's in
the light now for this I guess as long
as you can recognize what it is and use
the same recognize it is the same one so
then you get this equations and I
explained how this works in a particular
example last time are there any
questions about this yes
large T is the unit tangent vector it's
the vector which is obtained by taking
the derivative vector in divided by
magnitude provided that the magnitude
vector is non zero to be absolutely
precise I should say lines that make
sense okay
anything else yes
not really because here I subtract the
position so the position is no no
connection to the derivative you see
it's really this vector but I think what
you are saying is so the question was
about whether this vector has anything
anything to do with the position vector
and this might be the reason why you
might think so is because I draw it
starting from this point C but that's
just a matter of convenience because
this is this vector I would like to say
that this vector is tangent to this to
this curve at this point so it's better
to draw it here to indicate that but it
doesn't mean it doesn't mean that
somehow I have to add the position
vector to this this is a vector of
itself right I'm just I'm choosing to
draw to take at the initial point for
this vector the point P whereas I chose
as the initial point for the position
that the origin and so as I explained
before there's no there is no reason to
choose this at that point it depends on
the context we can choose any point in
other words a given vector can be drawn
starting from any point I could draw
this vector R prime starting from this
point which has nothing to do with this
picture at all but it doesn't it doesn't
negate the fact that this vector is the
same as this vector as long as they're
parallel and have the same magnitude
here I mean so just the fact I draw it
from here that would mean that I have to
add to it the position vector that's the
derivative vector and well that's the
way it is defined does this answer your
question
yes tangent vectors the velocity vector
that's right so tangent vector can also
be interpreted as the velocity vector
right that's a good point okay so let's
move on let's move on one more thing
before we move on we have discussed now
in detail differentiation of vector
valued functions and as I explained
differentiation of a vector valued
function like this simply means
differentiating the first component the
second component and the third component
separately you can also integrate vector
valued functions and this is something
which will be useful also for us a
little bit later in this class and again
to integrate a vector valued function
you simply integrate the first component
second component and third component so
it's very straightforward
by the way or in the homework assignment
which was posted before for this
particular section 13.2 there was a bug
in the HTML file and I prefer to say
it's a bug but actually I made a mistake
so so I made a mistake and I cut I cut
there a couple problems from the from
this line so I put them back now and so
but please use the updated version of
the homework assignment I haven't paid
any other changes just in 13.2 in this
particular section about the derivatives
of vector valued functions don't worry
don't worry this is just a couple of
exercises which are very simple I just
didn't want you to get the idea that
what's what's this versus Thermal about
look is they were there were only
exercises about derivatives about
tangent vectors for plane curves and I
didn't want you to get the idea that I
don't want you don't need to know about
derivatives for you know
three-dimensional things in
three-dimensional space so that's that's
all
all right so let's calm down and let's
move on
derivatives okay so next the next topic
we would need to discuss is functions of
two and three variables by the way one
other thing I remember now for plain
course there is a there is a connection
to what we discussed for plain cords
there is a connection to what we
discussed at the beginning of this
course plane by a plane curve I mean a
curve for which everything happens on
the plane instead of in space so let's
say in r2 you would have also vector
valued functions like this which would
correspond to curves on the plane in the
same way in which the three component
vector valued functions correspond to
curves in space and then again the same
thing happens which is that the tangent
vector could be found by taking
derivatives at the particular point
could be taken found by taking
derivatives of the components now in
what sense is it related to what we
discussed before you see what we
discussed before was not so much the
tangent vectors because we did it at
that time we didn't talk about vectors
we discussed the slope we discussed the
slope so we had a curve now on the plane
okay and we talked about the slope which
is the tangent of the angle theta and we
found the slope and this is again a
point P equal to zero and we found the
slope as X prime sorry y prime divided
by X prime which or whatever D dy DT 1
dy DT divided by DX DT which was G prime
of T 0 divided by F prime of T G
and now everything I want I just want to
show you that everything is consistent
because now we actually give a more
detailed information not just the slope
but actually the times exact itself and
what I'm saying is that in this vector
this factor has two components one of
them is the horizontal one is f prime of
T zero
right and the vertical one is G prime of
T zero so the in fact the vector the
tangent vector is has these two
components f prime of T 0 and G prime of
T 0 but then of course what is the slope
what is the ancient of the what is the
tangent of this angle well this is a
this is a right triangle with the right
angle and so the tangent by definition
is this side divided by this side and we
lo and behold you you get back that
formula so what we get now there's more
precise information about what the
tangent vector is it's really consistent
with the old information which was just
about the tangent of this vector also
known as slope in the three-dimensional
space we can't really talk about the
slope because you know now an hour a
vector has three components so we can we
can talk about ratios of different of
different pairs of components there is
not a particular pair of components that
is special but in two dimensions there
only two coordinates and therefore we
can talk about the ratio of the second
one to the first one which is what we
call the slope so so thinking in terms
of vectors kind of allows us to
generalize the analysis we did for plane
curves to the case of curves in 3-space
okay so that was my last comment on this
subject and now I want to talk about
functions in two and three variables
so the next topic is the next topic is
functions in two and three variables so
in fact I would like to put it in a more
general context up to now we have talked
about different kinds of functions we
have talked about functions in one
variable which we usually write like
this f of X like x squared or cosine of
X or e to the X it's a function one
variable and today we we talked a little
bit last time we talked about vector
valued functions
which we write as R of T and this vector
valued functions may take values in
vectors in two-dimensional space or in
vectors in three-dimensional space so in
both of these cases the word function is
used which begs the question as to
whether these objects really are similar
in what way what are functions and this
is really very elementary and very
intuitive but we have to say it once
once and for all so that there are no
there's no immediately left
so a question is what is the what is the
function what do we mean by a function
in mathematics in general of course you
know of course in our everyday life we
use the word function you know we say
our appetite is a function of how much
we've eaten before you know so what does
it suggest you suggest a logical
connection you know if you if we ate
well if you a we fight a lot of that
before I'm not so I'm not so hungry if I
haven't eaten all day you know it's busy
then I'm hungry right so each code has a
certain result so there is a certain
rule there is a certain logical
connection and that's exactly what we
mean by function in mathematics in
mathematics a function is a rule which
takes each element of what we call the
domain of the function the main of the
function and transforms it to an element
of what we call the range of the
function and the point is that we can
choose F domain and range we can choose
all kinds of all kinds of objects and
each time we make a choice we will get
particular functions for instance to get
a function one variable we choose as a
domain our
the set of real numbers and as a range
we also choose are the same set of real
numbers right so it's kind of boring in
a way because we choose the simplest set
in both cases not the simplest one but
in perhaps one of the most obvious ones
so then the rule the rule takes the
following shape given an element of R
which we'll call X so could be any
number zero one whatever by this rule
tells us what is the value of the
function so that's going to be another
number because well in general it's
going to be an element of this of the
range of the set which we call the range
but range now is R again
so the result of the rule should be an
element of so forth so in other words
when we write the formula f of X what do
we mean by this we mean that we have
created a rule which assigns to any
value X we assign a certain value f of X
for example say f of X is x squared so
that means that we can yeah I can ask
you for you know I can give you X and
you will tell me immediately what f of X
is say let's zero zero X is one it's one
if it's two it's four but it doesn't
have to be an integer
anything five has a valid for any value
I can substitute it into this function
and get this in other words it is just
writing this formula it's just a very
economical way to describe this rule
instead of making the table where for
each value of x I will write the value
of f of X and actually I wouldn't be
able to do it because there are
infinitely many values instead of making
this table I'm just do I just do it in C
any single formula because this is
formula I can use this formula
to convert any given value in the domain
into a value in the range by simply
squaring it right so 1/4 know takes care
of all elements in the domain which is
the set of real numbers that's what I
mean that's what we mean when we say a
function f of X it's not it's not one
number it's not even a rule which
assigns to one number another number
it's a rule which assigns to any number
here which is our some number here okay
is that clear all right now sometimes
when we write sort of function sometimes
the domain is not necessarily the entire
R for example sometimes we write f of X
is 1 over X so in this case we cannot
say the domain is R because the value x
equals 0 is forbidden this rule does not
tell us what the value is at x equals 0
because it's x equals 0 to get the rule
from this formula we would have to
calculate 1 divided by 0 and we know
that 1 divided by 0 is meaningless there
is no such number 1 divided by 0 so we
have to make some adjustment and the
simplest adjustment is to say the domain
for this function for this function is
not R but it's R without this point 0 so
all nonzero numbers
okay so but function doesn't have to be
that doesn't have to have a survey as a
domain R and the range to have are a
function could have any any domain in
any any range for it for instance let's
say the domain is the set of all
students in this class okay and the
range is letters a B C D and F okay so
then the function is the grade a final
grade okay because great well it's
actually little more because it's like a
minus D plus D parts okay but let's
simplify so a b c d and i don't know why
there's e because it's never used so
they say f anyway we'll hope that they
we don't we don't have so many values
like this so in principle any function
can happen right in principle and i
personally i would I wish that everybody
concern a you know it's possible if
everybody gets you know great results on
the test and everything everybody will
get an A now historically that's what
that's not what what has happened so I
don't you know think realistically I
don't expect that so this is a function
is going to be sometimes people call
this a curve you know because if you
because you can you can you can look at
the scores and then you can try you can
try to draw to draw the curve looking at
the number of people getting certainty
and so on right so it's already suggest
some connection to functions but just
think about it in a simple way each
student gets a grade so that's a
function each element in the domain
which is the student gets a grade which
is a which is a letter from you know
ABCDE F say so that's a function to it
we don't know yet what the function is
we will find out well you know by the
end of December but this is also good
illustration just by way of example that
anything where you have a certain input
and then I have a rule which transforms
this input into some output is a
function now in this course we look at
the
mains and ranges which are are to the N
so in other words what we not what we
are going to do now and what's different
between this course in the previous
calculus which have to do with single
variable calculus is that we are going
to to allow not just are going to are
but we will look at our today and going
to our to the M where m and M take
values 1 2 & 3 you have a question
second oh this way okay the question is
about this notation this notation
familiar no okay so I'm glad that you
you asked me about this so this means
belongs to this means belongs hmm or is
an element of this set and this means
the same but now in this in this
direction so I just switched it usually
usually we write like this I did this to
make it look nicer because then I have
to otherwise if I switch them and it
have to draw a lot of curve like this
but it's the same if we the three ends
is to where where it belongs so this
means X belongs to our our today and I'm
not the other way around and here f of X
belongs to the are to them it's clear
now okay good so so the domain and range
that we are going to look at in this
class are usually going to the R to the
N and R to the M which is which means
our R 2 R 3 okay sometimes we'll have to
look at some subset here we'll have to
remove something because function for
example may not be well defined at a
certain point like like this function
this function 1 over X is not well
defined when X is equal to 0 or more
precisely this rule does not tell us
what to do at X equal 0 so that means
this rule is really
only defined for the domain our without
the point theorem something like this
can happen here as well okay and so now
if we stand on this point of view that
there are these functions which have a
domain R to the N and as range R to the
M for some N and M 1 2 3 which could be
arbitrary not necessarily equal then we
can describe all the previous examples
as sort of object under the same
umbrella because for instance vector
valued functions we can now interpret as
functions in which the domain is our
domain is our is our and that's where
our variable key is going to live in the
range is r2 or r3 so in other words in
the case of r2 you will have P going to
F of G F of T and G of T an element of
our C you can also do the sign in this
way
and then you get an element in our tool
and likewise in in our three each T will
go to F of T G of T and H of T which is
M naught C so again a point in a point
in an R will go to a point in R 3 note
that there is a small very small
difference which I already mentioned
earlier which is that you can treat F of
T and G of T as components of a point or
at components of a vector so now I'm
really standing on the point of view
that I'm getting a point in R 2 instead
of a vector but because these are so
closely related we can think about both
both scenarios as both certain scenarios
as function it's just it just becomes
really the matter of what do I mean by
our r2 or r3 though I interpret r2 as a
set of points or the set of vectors and
in fact it's better to think of it as a
set of vectors but we oftentimes think
of it as a set of points but points and
vectors are given by the same
information by two components anyway so
that's why we really here I'm really
thinking of our two as being collections
of two numbers XY first coordinate
second coordinate and so I'm not I'm not
worrying about the fact whether these
are components of a point or components
of a vector I know that in each
particular situation in any given
context I will be able to interpret it
in the right way I'm just using the fact
that it has two components okay
so vector valued function now becomes an
example of a function because it's just
a rule assigning now to a single
variable to a single number which we
usually call T a couple pair of numbers
like here for a triple of numbers like
here does it make sense yeah okay so
that's what we mean by function with
values in vectors so in this case
our domain is our is always our but the
range is our three or our two you see so
we go through from the smallest one to
the the two big ones r2 and r3 and now
we can understand very easily what are
functions in two and three variables
it's sort of the opposite situation
where the domain is r2 or r3
but the ranges are so in that sense it's
no more difficult to understand as a
concept then then vector value functions
or even just ordinary functions from R
to R it's all part of the same story of
the same concept of functions so going
back to the title of this topic
functions in two and three variables by
function into a three by three variables
I simply mean a rule in which the domain
is r2 or r3 if I want two variables it
will be R 2 if I want three variables it
will be r3 and the ranges are so maybe I
will write it here let's just write like
this into our editor so then how to
express such a rule the main is now say
R 2 so it's a set of all pairs of points
and the range is it's just art so it
means that each X Y Co has to go to some
number so we have to denote this number
in somewhere and we're able to notice
the f of X Y okay
for example I could write f of X Y is
equal to X is equal to x squared plus y
squared what do I mean by this I mean
that whenever you give me some values X
Y I can substitute them into this
formula and I get a number you give me
two numbers but I give you one number
because I do something with them I take
a squared + y squared I take the sum so
I get one number so it is a rule which
assigns to this one number that is an
element of odd that's why writing this
formula can be interpreted as giving a
function in two variables two variables
because I point in r2 has two components
x and y which we think of as two
variables so again I could try to make a
make a table you know different values
of XY and recruit sponging values of F
so for example I start with 0 0 I get 0
I start with 1 0 I get 1 you know I
start just one one and get 2 but of
course I don't I cannot make the table
for the entire are 2 because they're
infinitely many points in that in that
table so instead I simply write this
formula so this is this kind of
functions appear in real life all the
time
and the typical example could be you
know a map of temperatures or or
atmospheric pressure in this case you
can think of you know some domain being
you can draw a map of a certain region
say the Bay Area and yeah and then you
and then you you plot it on the XY plane
so that each point in the Bay Area gets
the coordinate then gets coordinates x
and y and then you say you know like a
noun television when you watch the news
they did they show you this and we write
and the writing on temperature like you
know eight five degrees or whatever here
and then maybe here is like ninety and
then they hear they say something else
if you see you know and sometimes it's
called like 55 now joking maybe on a day
like this maybe seven okay so so what is
it you assign a value to each point so
you are defining a function each point
in on this map each point on this in
this region XY responds to certain
temperature so to each point you assign
a temperature so that that's that's an
example of a function likewise you can
think of the landscape you can look you
can think of the map of this area and
you can look at the height of like each
point the the height of this point as
well as compared to the to the sea level
so then again you get the height the
height gives you a function for each
point XY you give back you get a
particular height and this actually
gives a way to leads to a nice idea of
try of trying to interpret functions or
visualize functions in two variables in
terms of graphs of course for functions
in one variable this is a very old idea
functions of functions for one but in
variable we've been drawing graphs you
know for a long time and these are
almost reflex if I say if I say y equals
if I say y equals f of X ax squared
let's just say f of x equals x squared
okay so you immediately think about this
picture so this is a picture which you
draw in on the plane
by introducing the additional variable
this is your X and this and there's an
additional variable you introduce to
accommodate the value of the function
and then for each value you plot the
point on this plane by by loop by taking
as the as the x-coordinate the value of
x and the y coordinate you take f of X
of course here again there is a clash of
notation which you have to realize I
mean it's sort of a gank very clear from
the context but I would like to mention
it anyway when we talk about functions
in one variable we talk about their
graphs and the graph will function one
variable lives on the plane so even
though in your original problem the
domain is one-dimensional it's just X
there's only one variable U you are
forced to introduce the second variable
just because you also want to
accommodate the value the range the
elemental in the range and we usually
call this coordinate Y so we write the
graph is y equals f of X Y so Y is equal
to f of X but this Y has nothing to do
with this Y because when I talk about
functions in two variables I talk about
functions in x and y why because
because the X&Y is like the two
variables they go you know they go next
to each other an alphabet so it's
natural once I say X I have to say Y
maybe you would you know you'd be
surprised if I say function of X and ay
or Sunday's like what's wrong with you -
is everybody unless you're talking like
this so what did the X the next one is
you say you say Y but now in this
context why has nothing to do with the
domain this is the domain and only has
one variable and this Y clip-ons - range
- the range you see but now when we talk
about functions in two variables we use
the same notation x and y to indicate
the two variables in the domain so now
to draw a graph of this of this business
of this function we have to go to the
three dimensional space because let's
introduce one more variable which
corresponds to the range the range in
both cases is our but here I denote it
by Y because I use just X and so the
next comes next
letter that comes is y now I already use
x and y for my domain so I have to I
have to use a different coordinate
different name for the range and usually
I say Z just because it comes it's a
next letter in alphabet right so for
instance if I if I choose as my function
in two variables this function f of XY
equals x squared plus y squared what
kind of picture do I get it will just be
a surface given by the equation Z equals
x squared plus y squared unfortunately
we have already discussed the surface so
we know what it looks like right this is
an example of an elliptic paraboloid
which looks like this and I kind of want
to indicate some more curves on it just
to give it sort of more shape okay so
that's a paraboloid
so this is the graph of the function
which is the parabolic elliptic
all right likewise you can also talk
about functions in three variables so
here I talk about function in two
variables but I can also talk about
functions in three where in this case
domain is r3 and the range is are our
three ranges of XYZ right so of course
this is also meaningful because for
example if you talk about barometric
barometric pressure stove atmospheric
pressure well for temperatures we
usually just measure temperature the
surface but for pressure it makes sense
to also look no higher so we're really
talking about the point in space and we
assigned to a point in space the
pressure so it's really functioning
three variables three for each point in
this classroom there is a particular
value temperatures also for example we
could measure temperature you know at
each point in a classroom and there will
be some small variations if you wanted
to draw a graph of this function though
you would have to introduce one more
variable and now we've run out of
letters because V is the last letter of
the alphabet right so then we start from
the beginning so then we can say a a is
equal to f of X Y so the graph is now
going to be graph is info limit in four
dimensional space but since we since we
are not we cannot really visualize our
four we're not going to talk about this
what we can talk about though are the so
called level curves and level surfaces
so when I draw this when I draw this
graph I almost feel the urge to draw
this additional circles because you know
when you look when you look from far
away this kind of gives a certain depth
to the picture and you kind of it makes
you understand what what I'm talking
about and in fact it looks even better
if I do a few more
so right and so I am actually indicating
I'm kind of thinking that they're
transparent so I'm indicating also the
backside of those circles but but but
not that kind of denote as visible as
the front ones okay
so what are these circles this is
something that we learned when we talked
about quadratic surfaces of which of
course elliptic paraboloid is just one
example when we talk about quadratic
surfaces we learned that a very
efficient way to understand the
structure of this quadratic surfaces is
to cut them or slice them by planes
parallel to a given coordinate plane so
in particular we could slice it by plane
Z equals something cut by by the plane Z
equals K so when we cut this graph by
this plane we get a curve because it's
intersection of two surfaces now and the
intersection is the curve will reach
this curve well I look at this equation
and look at this equation now in this
equation this is a number K is a number
so keep example could be 1 2 3 4
whatever so that's different from a B so
it different from X Y Z which are
variables which can take arbitrary
values here now
if you look at this this equation and
you couple it with this equation what
you get is of course x squared plus y
squared equals equals K and that's one
of those circles so this that when you
slice it you've got the point the set of
intersection will be a curve and that
curve will be given by this equation
which indicates it is the circle of
radius square root of K and this circles
we get by looking by looking at all the
points on the graph which share the same
value of Z so in other words it's kind
of like the same
level if you think of this as being the
landscape so there is sort of a hole in
the ground then this will be all the
points which are at the same height or
sort of the same level below they're
below the surface you see so so in other
words what this is it immediately leads
to the terminology levels or level
curves this is all the points on the
graph which are at the same level and
saying level just means fixing the value
of Z okay likewise when you have when
you have a function in three variables
you can also fix this value a over
variable a so you say a is equal to K
and what you get is an equation like
this f of X Y Z is equal to K and so
what it is now it is the surface and we
call it the level surface for this
function in other words for each value
of K for example 1 2 3 4 and so on we
can look at all points X Y Z which share
the same value with respect to the
function f so that's now a surface just
like before it was a curve but now we
have an extra variable so you would get
its surface and that's called the level
surface and so you can look at various
examples of this so that's roughly
that's roughly what we need to know
about functions in two and three
variables from the sort of qualitative
point of view and now we would like to
understand them from a more quantitative
point point of view like what can we do
with these functions and of course our
goal really is to do the relatives and
and integrals of its functions and
that's really the crux of this course
it's really understanding derivatives of
these functions and integrals of this
function and you see right away that is
going to be more difficult than before
because for instance if you if we think
just in terms of
two variables for example we can
differentiate with respect to X or we
can differentiate sector Y and in fact
there is more because we could even
differentiate in some direction which is
kind of in between which is kind of a
combination of X and y you see so there
are many more choices and we have to
understand much better what derivative
means in this context same with
integrals but first we'll talk about
differentiation now when we define
differentiation and I kind of talked
about it earlier when I talked about the
derivative of vector function the
derivative it defines in terms of the
limit when you take the sort of the
change in position divided by the change
in time when you define when you get the
velocity for example you take the limit
so before we can talk about derivatives
before we can talk about the relatives
we have to talk about limits we have to
understand what limits me with limits
mean in the context of functions in 20
variables and this is somewhat this is a
somewhat obscure subject because to
really to really truly understand it
we have to have to work really hard
because we have to give a precise
definition of the limit and things like
that we're not going to do that and I'm
going to to prove theorems about limits
if you like you can read about it in the
book but what I'd like you to understand
is the kind of a qualitative picture in
other words the main ideas as to what
what the intuitive idea of the limit is
and what kind of examples you know what
are the possible scenarios where
possible situations when limit exists or
doesn't exist and that's what I'm going
to explain so let me start with
functions of environment one variable if
you have a function one variable right
look at the graph of this function so
let's say this is a graph and you pick a
particular point x0 so you want to see
what happens with the value of the
function in a small neighborhood of this
point as you approach this point you see
you want to see what you want you want
to see what happen and you hear me yes
okay tell me if you stop here because I
have red I have the red light so I hope
it works for another 15 minutes
otherwise we'll have to see if I can
find them
let's go back so
we would like to see how the value of
this function behaves in the
neighborhood of this point in other
words how predicts how predictable the
function is as we approach this point we
can trace the values of this function
and we can try to see whether they are
also they also tend to the value of the
function at the point X 0
now of course and if on this picture is
clear that yes because it kind of smooth
I do it I drew it in one stroke which is
pretty much to say that it is
predictable function or what we call
multi-site a continuous function but
that's not the only possibility I could
draw something like this I could draw
instead something like this where you go
like this and you go like this so now
with the function jumps here so let's
say the value to the left of this point
to the left of this point the values can
behave in a nice way they if I start if
I start from the point below x0 and I
start moving towards x0 the value will
move towards the value of the function
at x0 and that I want in the key that
this is not this circle means that then
there is no point here this branch only
takes care of the points which are which
are larger greater than this one okay so
on this side if I start approaching this
point I get values on this branch but
then when I get to this point there is a
job the value here and not here so in
this case we will say that the limit of
this function does not exist because it
exists on one side but it doesn't exist
on the other side you see in other words
the limit of the function exists but
it's not equal to the value given so the
function is not continuous there is
another there is another option
[Applause]
there is another option the value could
go to infinity in this case we will also
say that the limit doesn't exist
for example our favorite example our
first example for this is a hyperbola in
a y equals 1 over X so the limit now
limit as the X goes to 0 ok and that's
not all because what's another thing
that can happen is the function we know
go to infinity but it can oscillate like
crazy for example the function typical
example function sine 1 over X around 0
this function doesn't have a limit
because as you approach f as you get
closer to 0 1 over X goes to infinity
and the function starts oscillating
faster and faster and in Sri you never
know you cannot say what is the what is
the limiting value because it somehow is
everywhere between minus 1 and 1 so
again no no limit at x equals you in
other words you see that there is sort
of the most favorable scenario in some
sense which is the most typical one what
we are going to use mostly in this
course but at the same time you have to
realize that that's not the only
possible scenario it's really a
favorable one but there are it's quite
possible to have different different
different situations despite it quite
possible to have situation of a jump
that the limit from one side is not
equal to the limit from the other side
the recitation where the value goes to
infinity so again there is no limit or
the function oscillates in a way that
makes it impossible to say what is the
limit when it approached a particular
point and that's just the case of
function one variable so in the case of
function two and three variables there
are even more scenarios
and what I would like to do is to
explain just a couple of them so that
you get an idea sort of what this
functions of the way those functions
could behave so first of all the
favorable scenario still remains all the
functions in two variables as we looked
at up to now for example the quadratic
functions they are all well behaved in
the sense that they are predictable as
you move as you move
you take coins XY in a small
neighborhood of a given point x0 y0 and
you take the value of the function f of
XY then when x and y then tends to X 0 y
0 the value of this function will also
tend to the value at x 0 y 0 so that in
this case we will say that the function
has a limit the function has a limit as
x 0 y 0 and it continues and functions
like polynomial functions for example
and all kinds of functions involving
sine and cosine and the exponential
function are all continuous you get in
trouble when you start dividing by
something that could become zero but
which of course you see already in
example one in the one-dimensional case
when you divide by something which could
become zero you are in trouble but in a
case of two and three variables
there are sort of more more
possibilities and more possibilities to
divide by zero and the typical examples
which are which mu you will see you in
the book and on homework involve
division by some expression some
polynomial which which becomes zero at
the point at a given point so typical
example is a function f of X which is
equal to say x squared divided by x
squared plus y squared so the question
that you'll be asked is whether this
function has a limit does it have a
limit as XY tends to tends to 0 0 we see
if for example you have if you have x
squared plus 2x plus 1 you don't even
have to think about this really because
this is actually never never 0 right
it's never 0 because you add 1 for sure
it's not 0 in a small neighborhood of
this point so you can even plus any
small number it will do so then there is
no issue this is kind it doesn't become
0 and and therefore you can be assured
by various theorems which can be proved
in a fairly straightforward way that
actually has a limit and function it
continues the only reason why we have to
worry about this is because we have an
expression which actually becomes 0 at
this point so we can't really divide
completely divided by this we cannot
literally divide by this value it is 0
so we cannot divide by 0
now if here you have something like x
squared plus 1 again you don't have to
think about it too much because poor
even for simplicity let's just say 1
divided by square
this will be exactly like this I mean
the thing just blows up because when X&Y
I go to zero this becomes very small and
you take one divided by this it becomes
very large so when X Y go to zero zero
that goes to infinity so clearly there
is no limit so again that's an easy case
you see that's an educate in other words
if the numerator doesn't go to zero and
denominator goes to zero the thing goes
to infinity and I mean the value of the
function goes infinity so there is no
limit so the only subtlety is when both
numerator and denominator go to zero
like on this case okay so in this case
sometimes it could be that it has a
limit and sometimes it could be that it
doesn't and so I have just enough time
to tell you right I have just enough
time to tell you what what happens in
this particular case and then you will
see in the book and in a non homework
you will see other examples very similar
to this
so I'm going to I'm going to show you
that this function actually does not
have a limit and so here's how I'm going
to do that I'm going to approach the
point 0 0 the origin in two different
ways approach in two different way okay
the first way I'm going to approach it
is I'm going to say I'm going to
approach it along this along the y axis
like this so in other words in the first
way I will say that X Y is 0 Y and then
Y goes to 0 so this way I eliminate one
of the two variables namely X and I get
a function in just one variable Y so I
kind of go back to the one dimensional
case which I can analyze more easily so
let me see what do I I'm sorry I made a
mistake there for X Y I have a function
two variables
but now I convert it into a function one
variable so I I set X equal zero so what
do I get I get zero squared divided by
zero squared plus y squared all right if
Y is non zero this is non 0 this is 0
divided by Y squared when I'm
approaching zero right I'm approaching
here but I've noticed at 0 I'm looking
outside of the point zero but very very
close so outside of the point zero this
is very small but still nonzero so
that's why I'm allowed to to take the de
to take the ratio of this because Y pi
is not zero it's not zero but it's
approaching here so this is not this is
okay and it gives me zero so along this
this ray along this ray along this path
I get the value 0 ok so that's the first
calculation in the second calculation I
will go along this path that's number
two and now I'll do the opposite I will
say X Y is X zero and now I will take X
to zero but not equal to zero and see
what I could I get so I get F of F 0 is
equal to x squared divided by x squared
plus zero squared so that's x squared
divided by X now fire such an expression
X square by a divided by x squared and I
know that X is nonzero I can take the
ratio and it's just 1 so the upshot of
this calculation is that the result the
value of the function depends on the
path along which I'm approaching my
point you see it is in some sense it's
very similar to what happens in this
picture if I approach from this side I
get this value if I approach from this
side I get this value but if my domain
is just one-dimensional
that's the
or in some sense that can happen because
you know I only the only ambiguity I
have when approaching the point is from
this side or from this side but when the
domain is two-dimensional there are many
more choices I can approach it along
this path along this path along this
path
in fact when there are many other paths
as well and so what you need to see for
the function to have a limit is that
along each of these paths you're going
to get the same result I have now shown
you that along one of them you get zero
and along the other one you get one so
you get different results that means
that the function does not have a limit
at this point okay so we are out of time
so let's go and we'll continue next week